# Analysis of Next-Gen Sequencing Data (ANGSD) Project <br />
### Project Summary
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia, it is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder that affects millions of people worldwide, contributing to roughly 60-70% of dementia cases [1]. The presenilin 1 (PSEN1) gene, which encodes a component of the γ-secretase complex involved in the processing of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), is known to be linked to familial AD (fAD) [2,3]. Several mutations in the PSEN1 gene have been identified in fAD patients, including the A79V mutation. The specific impact of the A79V mutation on gene expression in neuronal cells, however, is not well understood. A recent study by Corsi et al. investigated the A79V PSEN1 mutation in a 48 year old female patient [4]. This project aims to investigate the hypothesis that the A79V mutation in PSEN1 leads to changes in mRNA expression levels in neuronal cells, specifically in coding genes associated with ECM components that are associated with neuron morphology, structural integrity, and plasticity. This project utilizes data obtained from the Corsi et al. study which are glutamatergic cortical neurons derived from fAD-mutant human induced pluripotent stem cells and their individual isogenic controls generated by CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing [4]. NOTE: The final project submission is entitled project_report.Rmd and project_report.html. It provides detailed methods on how to download files and run analyses. 

# References

[1] D. M. Holtzman, J. C. Morris, and A. M. Goate, “Alzheimer’s disease: The challenge of the second century,” Science Translational Medicine, vol. 3, no. 77, 2011. 

[2] R. Delabio, L. Rasmussen, I. Mizumoto, G.-A. Viani, E. Chen, J. Villares, I.-B. Costa, G. Turecki, S. A. Linde, M. C. Smith, and S.-L. Payão, “PSEN1 and PSEN2 gene expression in alzheimer's disease brain: A new approach,” Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 757–760, 2014. 

[3] H.-M. Lanoiselée, G. Nicolas, D. Wallon, A. Rovelet-Lecrux, M. Lacour, S. Rousseau, A.-C. Richard, F. Pasquier, A. Rollin-Sillaire, O. Martinaud, M. Quillard-Muraine, V. de la Sayette, C. Boutoleau-Bretonniere, F. Etcharry-Bouyx, V. Chauviré, M. Sarazin, I. le Ber, S. Epelbaum, T. Jonveaux, O. Rouaud, M. Ceccaldi, O. Félician, O. Godefroy, M. Formaglio, B. Croisile, S. Auriacombe, L. Chamard, J.-L. Vincent, M. Sauvée, C. Marelli-Tosi, A. Gabelle, C. Ozsancak, J. Pariente, C. Paquet, D. Hannequin, and D. Campion, “App, PSEN1, and PSEN2 mutations in early-onset alzheimer disease: A genetic screening study of familial and sporadic cases,” PLOS Medicine, vol. 14, no. 3, 2017. 

[4] G. I. Corsi, V. P. Gadekar, H. Haukedal, N. T. Doncheva, C. Anthon, S. Ambardar, D. Palakodeti, P. Hyttel, K. Freude, S. E. Seemann, and J. Gorodkin, “The transcriptomic landscape of neurons carrying PSEN1 mutations reveals changes in extracellular matrix components and non-coding gene expression,” Neurobiology of Disease, vol. 178, p. 105980, 2023. 


